=== 第 1 页 ===
INTRINSIC DIMENSIONALITY EXPLAINS THE EFFEC -
TIVENESS OF LANGUAGE MODEL FINE -TUNING
Armen Aghajanyan, Luke Zettlemoyer, Sonal Gupta
Facebook
{armenag,lsz,sonalgupta}@fb.com
ABSTRACT
Although pretrained language models can be ﬁne-tuned to produce state-of-the-
art results for a very wide range of language understanding tasks, the dynamics
of this process are not well understood, especially in the low data regime. Why
can we use relatively vanilla gradient descent algorithms (e.g., without strong reg-
ularization) to tune a model with hundreds of millions of parameters on datasets
with only hundreds or thousands of labeled examples? In this paper, we argue
that analyzing ﬁne-tuning through the lens of intrinsic dimension provides us with
empirical and theoretical intuitions to explain this remarkable phenomenon. We
empirically show that common pre-trained models have a very low intrinsic di-
mension; in other words, there exists a low dimension reparameterization that is
as effective for ﬁne-tuning as the full parameter space. For example, by optimiz-
ing only 200 trainable parameters randomly projected back into the full space, we
can tune a RoBERTa model to achieve 90% of the full parameter performance
levels on MRPC. Furthermore, we empirically show that pre-training implicitly
minimizes intrinsic dimension and, perhaps surprisingly, larger models tend to
have lower intrinsic dimension after a ﬁxed number of pre-training updates, at
least in part explaining their extreme effectiveness. Lastly, we connect intrinsic
dimensionality with low dimensional task representations and compression based
generalization bounds to provide intrinsic-dimension-based generalization bounds
that are independent of the full parameter count.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Pre-trained language models (Radford et al., 2019; Devlin et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019; Lewis et al.,
2019; 2020) provide the defacto initialization for modeling most existing NLP tasks. However, the
process of ﬁne-tuning them on often very small target task datasets remains somewhat mysterious.
Why can we use relatively vanilla gradient descent algorithms (e.g., without strong regularization) to
tune a model with hundreds of millions of parameters on datasets with only hundreds or thousands
of labeled examples?
We propose intrinsic dimensionality as a new lens through which ﬁne-tuning can be analyzed (Li
et al., 2018). An objective function’s intrinsic dimensionality describes the minimum dimension
needed to solve the optimization problem it deﬁnes to some precision level. In the context of pre-
trained language models, measuring intrinsic dimensional will tell us how many free parameters are
required to closely approximate the optimization problem that is solved while ﬁne-tuning for each
end task. For example, we will show that 200 parameters (randomly projected back into the full
parameter space) are enough to represent the problem of tuning a RoBERTa model to within 90%
of the performance of the full model. More generally, we also describe a set of strong empirical and
theoretical connections between intrinsic dimensionality, number of parameters, pre-training, and
generalization.
We ﬁrst empirically show that standard pre-trained models can learn a large set of NLP tasks with
very few parameters and that the process of pre-training itself implicitly minimizes the intrinsic di-
mension of later tuning for different NLP tasks. We continue by conducting a study across over a
dozen various pre-trained models to show that number of parameters strongly inversely correlates
with intrinsic dimensionality, at least in part to justify the extreme effectiveness of such models. We
1
arXiv:2012.13255v1  [cs.LG]  22 Dec 2020

=== 第 2 页 ===
interpret pre-training as providing a framework that learns how to compress the average NLP task.
Finally, we connect intrinsic dimensional with low dimensional task representations and compres-
sion based generalization bounds to provide intrinsic-dimension-based generalization bounds that
are independent of the full parameter count, further justifying why these methods generalize so well
in practice across tasks.
The contributions of our paper are the following:
• We empirically show that common NLP tasks within the context of pre-trained representa-
tions have an intrinsic dimension several orders of magnitudes less than the full parameter-
ization.
• We propose a new interpretation of intrinsic dimension as the downstream ﬁne-tuning task’s
minimal description length within the framework of the pre-trained model. Within this
interpretation, we empirically show that the process of pre-training implicitly optimizes
the description length over the average of NLP tasks, without having direct access to those
same tasks.
• We measure the intrinsic dimension of a large set of recently developed pre-training meth-
ods. We discover that there exists a fortuitous trend where larger models tend to have a
smaller intrinsic dimension.
• Lastly, we show that compression based generalization bounds can be applied to our in-
trinsic dimension framework to provide generalization bounds for large pre-trained models
independent of the pre-trained model parameter count.
2 R ELATED WORK
Calculating the intrinsic dimension of an objective function was proposed Li et al. (2018). In their
paper, they analyzed the impact of various architectures on the intrinsic dimensionality of their
objective. Our work is a direct extension of this paper, focusing on analyzing pre-trained represen-
tations instead.
There is a large collection of literature analyzing pre-trained models from the perspective of capacity.
For example, a recent line of work has shown that pre-trained models such as BERT are redundant
in their capacity, allowing for signiﬁcant sparsiﬁcation without much degradation in end metrics
(Chen et al., 2020; Prasanna et al., 2020; Desai et al., 2019). Houlsby et al. (2019) showed that ﬁne-
tuning top layers of pre-trained models is not effective and that alternate methods allow ﬁne-tuning
effectively with a couple of percent of the parameters. Furthermore, we can view computing the
intrinsic dimensionality as a continuous relaxation of the sparsiﬁcation problem.
Moreover, standard approaches towards ﬁne-tuning seem to have non-trivial effects on the gener-
alization of pre-trained representations (Aghajanyan et al., 2020). A holistic explanatory picture
of the successes of ﬁne-tuning has not yet been painted. A clear understanding of the underlying
mechanisms which lead to the incredible generalization of ﬁne-tuned pre-trained representations
is currently missing. Moreover, we still do not understand why various pre-training methodology
manifests in universally useful representations.
3 I NTRINSIC DIMENSIONALITY OF FINETUNING
Background An objective function’s intrinsic dimension measures the minimum number of pa-
rameters needed to reach satisfactory solutions to the respective objective (Li et al., 2018). Alterna-
tively, the intrinsic dimension represents the lowest dimensional subspace in which one can optimize
the original objective function to within a certain level of approximation error. Computing the exact
intrinsic dimensional of the objective function is computation intractable; therefore, we resort to
heuristic methods to calculate an upper bound. Let θD = [θ0,θ 1,...,θ m] be a set of D parameters
that parameterize some model f(·,θ ). Instead of optimizing the empirical loss in the original pa-
rameterization (θD), the subspace method ﬁne-tunes the model via the following re-parametrization
in the lower-dimensionsald-dimensions:
θD =θD
0 +P (θd) (1)
2

=== 第 3 页 ===
whereP : Rd→ RD projects from a parameter from a lower dimensional d to the higher dimen-
sionalD. Intuitively, we do an arbitrary random projection onto a much smaller space; usually, a
linear projection, we then solve the optimization problem in that smaller subspace. If we reach a
satisfactory solution, we say the dimensionality of that subspace is the intrinsic dimension. This
methodology was proposed in the seminal paper by Li et al. (2018). Concretely Li et al. (2018) pro-
posed 3 various actualizations ofP ; a random linear dense projection (θdW ), random linear sparse
projection(θdWsparse) and random linear projection via the Fastfood transform (Le et al., 2013).
We will primarily use the Fastfood transform, deﬁned as:
θD =θD
0 +θdM M =HGΠHB (2)
The factorization ofM consists ofH, a Hadamard matrix,G, a random diagonal matrix with inde-
pendent standard normal entries,B a random diagonal matrix with equal probability±1 entries, and
Π a random permutation matrix. Furthermore, the matrix multiplication with a Hadamard matrix
can be computed inO(D logd) via the Fast Walsh-Hadamard Transform. Note that everything but
θd is ﬁxed; therefore, the optimization problem lies only in d-dimensions. Note that if we place
a constraint of M being a binary matrix, we recover the sparsiﬁcation problem; therefore, we can
view ﬁnding intrinsic dimensionality as a continuous relaxation of the sparsiﬁcation problem.
The standard method of measuring the intrinsic dimensionality of an objective as proposed by Li
et al. (2018) requires searching over variousd, training using standard SGD over the subspace repa-
rameterizationθD and selecting the smallestd which provides us with a satisfactory solution (d90).
Li et al. (2018) deﬁned the satisfactory solution as being 90% of the full training metric. For ex-
ample, if we reach 85% accuracy training a model with all of its parameters, the goal is to ﬁnd the
smallestd, which would reach 0.9∗ 85% = 76.5% accuracy; we call this dimension d90. Let us
also note that by merely initializing θd = 0 we recover the original parameterization θD
0 which in
the context of ﬁne-tuning represents the original weights of the pre-trained model.
The way Li et al. (2018) deﬁne a satisfactory solution reduces the dependence of the dataset’s size on
the calculation of intrinsic dimension. For a small dataset, we will generally have worse end metrics;
therefore, we have a lowerd90 cut-off; inversely, a larger dataset will require a more non-triviald90
cut-off.
Structure Aware Intrinsic Dimension Due to the large size of pre-trained language models (gen-
erally in the hundreds of millions of parameters), the only computationally reasonable subspace
optimization method is one that utilizes the Fastfood transform. For example, if we are interested
in subspace training withd = 1000 for the RoBERTa-Large model using a dense matrix, we would
require 1.42 terabytes of memory to store just the projection matrix.
Unfortunately, the method of ﬁnding the intrinsic dimension proposed by Li et al. (2018) is un-
aware of the layer-wise structure of the function parameterized by θ. Existing literature argues that
in attention-based pre-trained models, individual layers specialize separately (Clark et al., 2019);
therefore, it is useful to incorporate a notion of structure when computingd90. We deﬁne Structure-
Aware Intrinsic Dimension (SAID) as the following
θD
i =θD
0,i +λiP (θd−m)i (3)
Form layers, we tradem parameters from our subspace parameterθd to allow for layer-wise scaling
through jointly learnedλ, thusθd becomes [θd−m,λ ]. This allows the SAID method to focus a larger
capacity of θd−m towards speciﬁc layers what might carry more relevant information for the task
at hand. Conversely, we will refer to the layer unaware method (Equation 2) as the Direct Intrinsic
Dimension (DID) method.
4 I NTRINSIC DIMENSIONALITY OF COMMON NLP T ASKS
4.1 S ENTENCE PREDICTION
We ﬁrst empirically calculate the intrinsic dimension of various pre-trained models on a set of sen-
tence prediction tasks from the GLUE Benchmark (Wang et al., 2018). We focus on analyzing BERT
(Devlin et al., 2018) and RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) at both the base and large model sizes.
3

=== 第 4 页 ===
102 103 104 105
d
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90Accuracy
MRPC Intrinsic Dimension
Model
BERT-Base
BERT-Large
RoBERTa-Base
RoBERTa-Large
102 103 104 105
d
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90Accuracy
QQP Intrinsic Dimension
Model
BERT-Base
BERT-Large
RoBERTa-Base
RoBERTa-Large
Figure 1: The following ﬁgures show the evaluation accuracy on two datasets and four models across
a range of dimensionsd for the DID method. The horizontal lines in each ﬁgure represent the 90%
solution of the respective full model.
We chose to experiment with MRPC (Dolan & Brockett, 2005) and QQP (Iyer et al., 2017) as
reference examples of small and large tuning datasets. MRPC is a binary classiﬁcation task for
predicting semantic equivalency for two paraphrases with roughly 3700 training samples, while
QQP is a binary classiﬁcation task for predicting semantic equality of two questions, with roughly
363k samples. For every dataset and every model, we run 100 subspace trainings with d ranging
from 10 to 10000 on a log scale. For every training run, we do a small hyperparameter search across
four learning rates. We initialize every θd to the zero vector to allow for our starting point to be
the original pre-trained model. Our subspace optimization method also operates over the randomly
initialized sentence classiﬁcation head to ensure we have exactlyd parameters to optimize.
We use both the SAID and DID subspace optimization methods, which we implemented in the
Huggingface Transformers library (Wolf et al., 2019). We present the results in Figure 1.
4.2 A NALYSIS
SAID DID
Model MRPC QQP MRPC QQP
BERT-Base 1608 8030 1861 9295
BERT-Large 1037 1200 2493 1389
RoBERTa-Base 896 896 1000 1389
RoBERTa-Large 207 774 322 774
Table 1: Estimated d90 intrinsic dimension for a set
of sentence prediction tasks and common pre-trained
models. We present both the SAID and DID methods.
The ﬁrst takeaway is the incredible low
dimensionality of viable solutions. With
RoBERTa-Large, we can reach 90% of the
full ﬁne-tuning solution of MRPC using
roughly 200 parameters and 800 parameters
for QQP (Table 1). Recall that our approxi-
mation of intrinsic dimension is necessarily
crude by using random projections and re-
stricting them to the use of Fastfood trans-
form; therefore, it is likely that the true in-
trinsic dimension is much lower.
Furthermore, RoBERTa consistently out-
performs BERT across various subspace di-
mensionsd while having more parameters. We leave a more in-depth analysis of model parameter
size on intrinsic dimensionality to a later section (§5.2).
Lastly we see that adding a notion of structure in the computation of intrinsic dimension is beneﬁcial
with the SAID method consistently improving over the structure unaware DID method.
4

=== 第 5 页 ===
40000 60000 80000 100000 120000 140000 160000 180000 200000
Updates
103
104
105
106
d90
RoBERTa Pre-Training Intrinsic Dimension Trajectory
Dataset
MRPC
QQP
Yelp
SST-2
MNLI
ANLI (R1+R2+R3)
Figure 2: Every 10k updates of RoBERTa-Base that we trained from scratch, we computed90 for six
datasets; MRPC, QQP, Yelp Polarity, SST-2, MNLI, and ANLI. If we were unable to compute ad90
for a speciﬁc checkpoint, we do not plot the point, hence some datasets start at later points. Unable
to compute means either we could not ﬁne-tune the full checkpoint to accuracy above majority class
or stabilize SAID training.
5 I NTRINSIC DIMENSION , P RE-TRAINING , AND GENERALIZATION GAP
One interpretation of the intrinsic parameter vector is that it encodes the task at hand with respect
to the original pre-trained representations. Therefore, we can interpret d as the minimal description
length of the task within the framework dictated by the pre-trained representations (Hinton & Zemel,
1993). Under this interpretation of intrinsic dimensionality, we hypothesize that pre-training is
implicitly lowering the intrinsic dimensionality of the average NLP task, and therefore compress the
minimal description length of those same tasks.
What do we more precisely mean by intrinsic parameter encoding a task within the framework pro-
vided by the pre-trained representations? Traditionally, a ﬁnetuned model (e.g. for a classiﬁcation
tasks) simply consists of a classiﬁcation head g, parameterized by wg applied to ﬁne-tuned repre-
sentations f, parameterized by wf per sample x. Therefore, to fully describe a task, we need to
pack together parameterizations and weights{g,f,w g,wf}. This model description is completely
decoupled from the original weights of the pre-trained representation wf0, therefore to represent
n classiﬁcation tasks, we need to maintain n{wg,wf}; additionally, the task representation is in-
credibly high dimensional. Conversely, ﬁne-tuning utilizing SAID ind-dimensions requires storing
onlyθd per task, a single random seed used to generateM and the original pre-trained weightswf0.
Therefore, we can represent arbitrary NLP tasks within a single pre-trained model framework with
d + 1 parameters.
For example, in the last section, we represented MRPC with roughly 200 parameters, which trans-
lates to needing less than a kilobyte of data to encode a complex natural language task within the
framework provided by RoBERTa.
We hypothesize that the better the pre-trained models are, the fewer bits (description length) are
needed to represent the average NLP task, as we will demonstrate empirically in the next section.
5.1 P RE-TRAINING INTRINSIC DIMENSION TRAJECTORY
To verify our hypothesis of pre-training optimizing intrinsic dimension, we retrain a RoBERTa-Base
from scratch and measure various NLP tasks’ intrinsic dimensions using the SAID method across
various checkpoints. We completely replicate the setting as described by (Liu et al., 2019) apart from
only training for a total of 200k steps (instead of 500k) with half the batch size (1k). To calculate
the intrinsic dimension more efﬁciently, we reuse the best learning rates discovered in Section 4 for
d< 10000 and use a ﬁxed learning rate for anything else. To ﬁndd90 we do a binary search across
d per each checkpoint, with a minimum d of 100 and a maximum of 4 million. The “full solution”
that we use when deciding d90 cut-off is computed by ﬁne-tuning the checkpointed model in the
standard way. We compute SAID on six datasets; MRPC, QQP, Yelp Polarity (Zhang et al., 2015),
SST-2 (Socher et al., 2013), MNLI (Williams et al., 2018) and ANLI using all rounds of data (Nie
et al., 2019).
5

=== 第 6 页 ===
We present our results in Figure 2. We see that the intrinsic dimensionality of RoBERTa-Base
monotonically decreases as we continue pre-training. We do not explicitly optimize for intrinsic
dimensionality, speciﬁcally during pre-training (the language model does not have access to down-
stream datasets!), but none-the-less the intrinsic dimension of these downstream tasks continues to
decrease.
More so, tasks that are easier to solve consistently show lower intrinsic dimensionality across all
checkpoints, for example, Yelp Polarity vs. the notoriously tough ANLI dataset. The correlation
between tasks traditionally hard for RoBERTa and their large intrinsic dimension hints at a con-
nection between generalization and intrinsic dimension. We will discuss generalization further in
Section §5.3.
Given our task representation interpretation of intrinsic dimensionality, we argue that the large scale
training of Masked Language Models (MLM) learns generic and distributed enough representations
of language to facilitate downstream learning of highly compressed task representations. Further-
more, we argue for another perspective of pre-training learning representations that form a compres-
sion framework with respect to various NLP tasks.
5.2 P ARAMETER COUNT AND INTRINSIC DIMENSION
We would also like to measure the relationships between the parameter count of arbitrary pre-trained
models and the intrinsic dimension of downstream NLP tasks. The optimal experiment to run would
be to ﬁx the pre-training method, e.g., MLM RoBERTa style, vary the architecture size from small to
very big, and compute the intrinsic dimension of a group of tasks at every size of the model. Unfor-
tunately, such an experiment is computationally infeasible due to the need to train many RoBERTa
models.
Due to these constraints, we opt to do an empirical study over existing pre-trained models, regardless
of the pre-training method. We show that the trend is strong enough to overcome differences in
training methodology. We select the following pre-trained models in our study: BERT (Devlin
et al., 2018), RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), BART (Lewis et al., 2019), Electra (Clark et al., 2020),
Albert (Lan et al., 2019), XLNet (Yang et al., 2019), T5 (Raffel et al., 2019), and XLM-R (Conneau
et al., 2019). Furthermore, we selected various sizes of these models, as available publicly within
the HuggingFace Transformers library (Wolf et al., 2019).
We used the MRPC dataset and computed intrinsic dimension for every pre-trained model utilizing
the same binary search methodology mentioned in the previous section with additional small hyper-
parameter searches across learning rate (due to the wide range of learning rates needed by various
models).
108 109
Number of Parameters
101
102
103
104
105
d90
 BERT-Base
 BERT-L RoBERTa-B
 RoBERTa-L
 XLM-R-B
 XLM-R
 Electra-B
 XLNet-B
 XLNet-L
 T5-Small
 T5-L
 BART-B
 BART-L
 Albert-B  Albert-L
 Albert-XL
 Albert-XXL
 T5-3B
Figure 3: We calculate the intrinsic dimension for a large set of pre-trained models using the SAID
method on the MRPC dataset.
We present our results in Figure 3. We see a strong general trend that as the number of parameters
increases, the intrinsic dimension of ﬁne-tuning on MRPC decreases. We ran this experiment on
other datasets to ensure that this is not an artifact of the dataset. Our experiments showed the same
trend; we refer to the Appendix for all trends per dataset.
6

=== 第 7 页 ===
103 104 105 106
d90
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9Eval Accuracy
RoBERTa Pre-Training Generalization Study
Dataset
MRPC
QQP
Yelp
SST-2
MNLI
ANLI (R1+R2+R3)
Figure 4: We plot the evaluation accuracy of six datasets across various intrinsic dimensionalities.
There is a strong general trend that pre-trained models that are able to attain lower intrinsic dimen-
sions generalize better.
103 104 105 106
d90
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
20.0%
25.0%Relative Generalization Gap
RoBERTa Pre-Training Generalization Study
Dataset
MRPC
QQP
Yelp
SST-2
MNLI
ANLI (R1+R2+R3)
Figure 5: We plot the intrinsic dimension and the respective relative generalization gap across a set
of varied tasks.
Within the same window of number of parameters, pre-training methodology becomes essential. For
example, in the regime of 108 parameters, the RoBERTa method of pre-training dominates similar
sized pre-training methods. However, there does not seem to be a method that can overcome the
limitations induced by the number of parameters. Interpreting these results through the lens of
learning a compression framework for NLP tasks is straightforward; the more parameters we have
in the model, the less we need to represent a task.
5.3 G ENERALIZATION BOUNDS THROUGH INTRINSIC DIMENSION
We have shown strong empirical evidence connecting pre-training, ﬁne-tuning, and intrinsic di-
mensionality. However, we have yet to argue the connection between intrinsic dimensionality and
generalization. Given that we have seen pre-training minimize intrinsic dimension, we hypothesize
that generalization improves as the intrinsic dimension decreases.
To do so, we will empirically experiment with the connections between d90 and evaluation set per-
formance by looking at various checkpoints from our RoBERTa experiments in Section §5.1. We
also plot the relative generalization gap (delta between train time performance and test time perfor-
mance).
In Figure 4 we plot the evaluation accuracy’s achieved by our pre-training experiment in Sec-
tion §5.1. A lower intrinsic dimension is strongly correlated with better evaluation performance.
Additionally we are interested in measuring relative generalization gap (acctrain−acceval
1−acceval
) across in-
trinsic dimension. We select the training accuracy that provides us with the best evaluation metrics
when computing this ﬁgure.
We present our results in Figure 5. Lower intrinsic dimension once again correlates strongly with a
smaller relative generalization gap. If we interpret the intrinsic dimension as a measure of complex-
ity, we expect the generalization gap to decrease with intrinsic dimension.
7

=== 第 8 页 ===
5.3.1 G ENERALIZATION BOUNDS
By applying standard compression based generalization bounds, we can provide theoretical backing
to the empirical connection between intrinsic dimension and generalization (Arora et al., 2018).
Consider the following deﬁnition of multi-class classiﬁcation loss with an optional margin over our
supervised datasetD.
Lγ(f) = P(x,y)∼D
[
f(x)[y]≤γ + max
i̸=y
f(x)[j]
]
(4)
Whenγ = 0,L0 recovers the standard classiﬁcation loss. Furthermore, Let ˆLγ(f) be an unbiased
empirical estimate of the margin loss.
Theorem 1. Letf be a function which is parameterized by θD as described in Equation 1 with a
total ofd trainable intrinsic parameters on a dataset withm samples. Then with a high probability,
we can state the following asymptotic generalization bound
L0(f)≤ ˆL0(f) +O
(√
d
m
)
(5)
Proof. We defer the proof Section §A.1 in the Appendix. We note that this is an extension of the
well-known compression based generalization bound explored by Arora et al. (2018).
This generalization bound is independent of the underlying parameter count ( D) of the pre-trained
model but depends on the ability to compress the downstream task ( d). Moreover, given that our
previous section shows larger models compress better, our bounds are aligned with general intuition
and recent empirical evidence that larger pre-trained models generalize better. Explicitly, these
bounds only apply to pre-trained methods trained with the intrinsic dimension subspace method;
research has yet to show that standard SGD optimizes in this low dimensional space (although
experimentally, this seems to be conﬁrmed). We leave the theoretical contribution of showing SGD
optimizes in this space, resembling something such as intrinsic subspace, for future work.
We want to highlight that generalization is not necessarily measured by the pre-trained model’s
parameter count or measure of complexity, but the pre-trained model’s ability to facilitate the com-
pression of downstream tasks. In some sense, if we want to compress downstream tasks better, we
must expect pre-trained representations to have a considerable measure of complexity.
6 C ONCLUSION
In conclusion, we proposed viewing the various phenomena surrounding ﬁne-tuning and pre-training
through the lens of intrinsic dimensionality. We empirically showed that common natural language
tasks could be learned with very few parameters, sometimes in the order of hundreds, when utilizing
pre-trained representations. We provided an interpretation of pre-training as providing a compres-
sion framework for minimizing the average description length of natural language tasks and showed
that pre-training implicitly minimizes this average description length.
We continued by doing an empirical study of existing pre-training methods and their respective in-
trinsic dimension, uncovering the phenomena that intrinsic dimensionality decreases as we increase
the number of pre-trained representation parameters. This phenomenon provides some intuitions to
the trend of growing pre-trained representations. We connected intrinsic dimensionality with gen-
eralization by ﬁrst showing that pre-trained models with lower intrinsic dimensions across various
tasks achieve higher evaluation accuracies and lower relative generalization gaps. Furthermore, we
explain these empirical results by applying well-known generalization bounds to the intrinsic di-
mension to get generalization bounds that grow on the order of the intrinsic dimension, not on the
pre-trained model’s parameter count.
Intrinsic dimensionality is a useful tool for understanding the complex behavior of large models.
We hope that future work will make explicit theoretical connections between SGD and optimizing
the intrinsic dimension as well as explain exactly why pre-training methods optimize the intrinsic
dimensionailty of tasks before not seen.
8

=== 第 9 页 ===
REFERENCES
Armen Aghajanyan, Akshat Shrivastava, Anchit Gupta, Naman Goyal, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Sonal
Gupta. Better ﬁne-tuning by reducing representational collapse.arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.03156,
2020.
Sanjeev Arora, Rong Ge, Behnam Neyshabur, and Yi Zhang. Stronger generalization bounds for
deep nets via a compression approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05296, 2018.
Tianlong Chen, Jonathan Frankle, Shiyu Chang, Sijia Liu, Yang Zhang, Zhangyang Wang, and
Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis for pre-trained bert networks. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and Christopher D Manning. What does bert look
at? an analysis of bert’s attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04341, 2019.
Kevin Clark, Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V Le, and Christopher D Manning. Electra: Pre-training
text encoders as discriminators rather than generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10555, 2020.
Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek,
Francisco Guzm ´an, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Un-
supervised cross-lingual representation learning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.02116, 2019.
Shrey Desai, Hongyuan Zhan, and Ahmed Aly. Evaluating lottery tickets under distributional shifts.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.12708, 2019.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
William B Dolan and Chris Brockett. Automatically constructing a corpus of sentential paraphrases.
In Proceedings of the Third International Workshop on Paraphrasing (IWP2005), 2005.
Geoffrey E Hinton and Richard Zemel. Autoencoders, minimum description length and helmholtz
free energy. Advances in neural information processing systems, 6:3–10, 1993.
Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe, An-
drea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efﬁcient transfer learning for nlp.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.00751, 2019.
Shankar Iyer, Nikhil Dandekar, and Kornel Csernai. First quora dataset
release: Question pairs, 2017. URL https://data.quora.com/
First-Quora-Dataset-Release-Question-Pairs .
Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Sori-
cut. Albert: A lite bert for self-supervised learning of language representations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.11942, 2019.
Quoc Le, Tam ´as Sarl ´os, and Alex Smola. Fastfood-approximating kernel expansions in loglinear
time. In Proceedings of the international conference on machine learning, volume 85, 2013.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
Levy, Ves Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-
training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.13461, 2019.
Mike Lewis, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Gargi Ghosh, Armen Aghajanyan, Sida Wang, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. Pre-training via paraphrasing, 2020.
Chunyuan Li, Heerad Farkhoor, Rosanne Liu, and Jason Yosinski. Measuring the intrinsic dimension
of objective landscapes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.08838, 2018.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
9

=== 第 10 页 ===
Yixin Nie, Adina Williams, Emily Dinan, Mohit Bansal, Jason Weston, and Douwe Kiela. Adversar-
ial nli: A new benchmark for natural language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.14599,
2019.
Sai Prasanna, Anna Rogers, and Anna Rumshisky. When bert plays the lottery, all tickets are win-
ning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00561, 2020.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text
transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.10683, 2019.
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Ng,
and Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on empirical methods in natural language pro-
cessing, pp. 1631–1642, 2013.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. GLUE:
A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks
for NLP, pp. 353–355, Brussels, Belgium, November 2018. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W18-5446. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
W18-5446.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
tence understanding through inference. InProceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long Papers), pp. 1112–1122. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018. URL
http://aclweb.org/anthology/N18-1101.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, R ´emi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Huggingface’s transformers:
State-of-the-art natural language processing. ArXiv, pp. arXiv–1910, 2019.
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V Le.
Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding. In Advances in neural
information processing systems, pp. 5753–5763, 2019.
Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. Character-level Convolutional Networks for Text
Classiﬁcation. arXiv:1509.01626 [cs], September 2015.
A A PPENDIX
A.1 P ROOFS
Arora et al. (2018) deﬁne(γ,S ) compressible using helper strings as the following.
Deﬁnition 1. (γ,S ) compressible using helper strings
SupposeGA,s ={gθ,s|θ∈A} is a class of classiﬁers indexed by trainable parameters A and ﬁxed
strings s. A classiﬁerf is (γ,S )-compressible with respect toGA using helper string s if there exists
θ∈A such that for anyx∈S, we have for all y
|f(x)[y]−gθ,s(x)[y]|≤ γ (6)
Remark 1. If we parameterize f(x;θ) via the intrinsic dimension approach as deﬁned in Equa-
tion 1, thenf is compressible losslessly using a helper string consisting of the random seed used to
generate the static random projection weights and the initial pre-trained representationθD
0 . There-
fore we sayf parameterized by either DID or SAID is (0,S ) compressible.
10

=== 第 11 页 ===
Theorem 2.1 in Arora et al. (2018) states given a compression consisting of r discrete states we
achieve the following generalization bound.
L0(f)≤ ˆLγ(f) +O
(√
d logr
m
)
(7)
We can trivially represent our parametersθd in a discrete fashion through discretization (as was done
in Arora et al. (2018)), and the number of states is dependent on the level of quantization but is static
once chosen (FP32 vs. FP16).
We then connect the fact that models trained in low dimensional subspace using SAID/DID methods
are (0, S)-compressible to derive the ﬁnal asymptotic bound.
L0(f)≤ ˆL0(f) +O
(√
d
m
)
(8)
11

